Hi friends.
In this video we will discuss about open hashing or separate chaining.
In previous videos,
we learnt about linear probing or closed hashing
So in linear probing or closed hashing,
if any collision occurs we will linearly check for
the available index one by one.
And if we find any available index in this checking,
we will place the key there.
For example, Let's insert key 20 in this hash table.
So the key is 20 % 5
That is zero. So check whether the hash index 0
is available. Here, it is not available as element 10
is already present in the hash index zero. So we
can say a collision occurred.
And in linear probing, what will we do? We will
linearly check for the available index one by one.
So check the next index and it is available.
So place our element 20 there.
So this is how we avoid a collision in closed
hashing or linear probing.
But in open hashing or separate chaining, we will use
an array of the linked list to avoid the collision
Here each linked list is considered as a chain.
Hence this method is called separate chaining. Here we have
five chains
chain[0] to chain[4].
See here,
If we want to insert Element 20, the key will
be 20%5 that is 0.
So we got key equal to zero
But an element 10 is already present there, which means a
collision occurred.
So in separate chaining, if collision occurs we will add
the node at the end of the linked list
So Element 20 will be added in the chain[0]
at the end. That is after node zero
Similarly, if you want to insert Element 30, the key
will be 30%5 which is equal to 0.
So we need to add the key in the chain[0]
at the end.
So add the element 30 after the node 20
Now let us see
an example
Let us assume the table size as three
So here we will have three chains. Chain[0],
chain[1]  and chain[2].
And these are the head nodes for three separate linked
lists.
First we have to initialise each linked list to NULL
which means each chain is empty now.
Now we have key equal to data% size
Suppose we need to insert element 6 in this table
So to find key we have 6%3 which
is equal to zero
So insert 6 in chain[0] and since
the list is empty now and this node should become
the head. So make this node the head of chain 0
And that is done.
Now let us
Insert another element 12. Again apply in this equation and we
will get key equal to 12 % 3 which is
again equal to zero
So insert 12 at the end of chain[0]
And as we do in linked list insertion, we have
to update the next of previous node which is zero
So node six now points to node 12
Now let us insert another element 10.
So to find key, we have 10 % 3
which is equal to one.
So we have to insert 10 in chain[1]
And since the list is empty, this node should become
the head of the list.
So make this node the head of chain[1] and
that is done.
So that is how open hashing is performed and we
find the key first, then go to chain[key]
and insert
the node at the end of that chain. Now let us
see its implementation. First let us define the size of
table as seven.
Now for the linked list node,
We have to create a structure node with int data
and stuct node * next
Now let us create the lists.
So write struct node * chain[size]. So seven
lists are created from chain[0] to chain[6]
Now we have to initialise these lists to NULL and
it is done by this init function.
Now we have the insert function to insert elements to
this table and this function takes the value to be
inserted as the input.
So let us insert seven first. So value equal to 7.
First we will create a node for this element
So create a new node and using malloc allocate
memory to it.
So the node is created. Now at data part, add
value that is seven and we always insert new nodes
at the end of the list.
So at next part set NULL. So that is also
done.
Now we need to find in which change should we
insert this node. That is we have to find the
key
So we have int key equal to size % value
that is 7 % 7 that is equal to 0
and zero will be stored in key.
So we have to insert seven in chain[0].
That is clear now.
Now we can have two cases:
That is, this chain is empty and the second case is
it has at least one node.
And if it is empty, the new node should become
the head. Otherwise just insert it at the end
of the list.
So to check it, we have
if(chain[key]=NULL). And it is. So set newnode = head
And here the head  is chain[0]
So that is set and else part will be skipped.
and the insertion is now completed.
Now let us insert another element 0. So first create the
new node and allocate memory. Set data part as value
and next part as NULL. Now find the key and we
will get value % size that is 0 % 7
equal to zero.
So we got the chain number. Now check if it
is empty or not.
So we have if chain[key] equal to NULL and
it is not.
So the chain is not empty. So we have to insert
the new node at the end of chain[0].
So go to else
part, find the last node of chain 0 and
insert the new node after that.
So use a while loop from head till we have
node->next=null.
So set temp = chain[0] which is head
and we have while (temp->next !=NULL)
And in first iteration itself, it fails.
So first node is also the last node.
So make temp->next equal to new node. So node is
inserted after the last node of chain and insertion is
completed.
Now let us insert another element 3
So first create newnode and allocate memory.
Set data part as value and next part as null and then
find the key and we will get value % size
That is 3 % 7 which is equal to 3
So we can understand that we have to insert this
element in chain 3. Now check if it is empty
or not.
So we have if(chain[key]=NULL) and
it is. So make the new node the head of
chain 3 and the insertion is completed.
Similarly elements 10, 4 and 5 will get inserted like
this
So that is how we perform insertion.
Now let us see how to print this table.
For that we have a print function and we will
use a for loop to print each chain.
So we have for (i=0;i<size;i++)
In each iteration, one chain will be
printed and each chain is a what? A linked list.
And how do we print a linked list? We will
traverse the list from head till we reach NULL and print
each node's data. So we will do the same in
each iteration.
So in first iteration, we have i equal to zero.
So copy chain[i], that is chain[0] which
is the head of first list to temp and print
chain[0] on screen.
And now we have the while loop while temp not
equal to NULL. So temp is not NULL
right now. So condition is okay.
So go inside and print temp's data that is 7
and that will be printed and now move temp to
next node. Now again check the condition temp is not
NULL
Now also
So again condition is okay
So go inside and print data at zero and now
move temp to next node.
Now check the condition and it fails now.
So we have reached the end of the list.
So the control comes out of while and prints NULL.
and first iteration of for loop is completed and we
got the first chain printed.
Similarly all chains will be printed in the next iterations.
So that is how we perform insertion and printing.
Now what about searching and deletion. These operations are
also as same as we perform searching and deletion in
linked lists.
So let us see how to search
So we will have the element to be searched
And first we will find the key.
And in that chain, we will search the element
as we search any linked list.
So let us see. We have value to be searched equal to 10
First find the key that is 10%7 equal to 3
So go to chain 3, and traverse it till we
reach 10
Or till we reach the end
So copy chain[3]
That is head of list 3 to temp and use a
while loop, while temp and in first iteration, check if
temp ->data = 10 and it is not. So move
temp to next node.
So go to next iteration and check
The condition and temp is now equal to 3028 not
NULL
Also the condition is okay
So check if temp->data equal to value 10 and
it is. So return one as the search is found.
And if the element is not present, then at a
point, that is, when temp reaches the last node, this
while loop condition will fail and control will come out
and return zero
So that was about searching.
And now let us talk about deletion. Deletion
is also a similar process. First
We have to find the key, go to that chain
and then perform deletion. So let us delete value
seven here.
So first find the key and it will be equal
to 7%7 which is equal to 0. Now
create temp initialised to head of chain 0, that is
chain[key] and also declare dealloc
Now before we can delete a node,
First we have to find if it is present or
not.
So we have to traverse the list to find the
value, that is, seven.
So we have if temp not equal to NULL
And it is true here. And here we can have
two cases.
One is node to be deleted is the head
And the second case is it is not head
So first check if head contains the element 7
And it is true here. So delete that node
Make its next node the new head. So copy temp
that is  head to dealloc and make temp's
next node the head. So we have temp equal
to temp->next
Now free the old head which is copied in dealloc
And the deletion is now successful. So we can return
one
Now it is delete another element 10
So first find the key and it will be equal to
10 % 7 which is equal to 3. Now create
temp and dealloc and temp is initialised to chain[key]
that is head of the list 3.
Now we have if temp not equal to NULL and
it is true.
And here as we discussed, we can have two cases
so we have to check it
So first check if head contains the element 10 and it
is not. So go to else part and traverse the
list to find 10
So we have while(temp->next) and in first
iteration, the condition is okay. So check if temp->next's
data is equal to 10 and it is. So delete
that node and make its previous node's next equal to
the node to be deleted's
next node. Otherwise it will point a
deleted memory.
So node to be deleted is temp->next and its
previous node is temp here
So copy temp->next to dealloc which is the
node to be deleted and make temp->next equal to
temp->next->next  that is NULL
Now free
The node which is copied in dealloc and the
deletion is now completed. So we can return one.
And if the node to be deleted is not found
that the control comes out of this while loop and
return zero as the deletion was unsuccessful.
So that is how we perform insertion, printing, searching and
deletion in open hashing.
So in insertion, we have to find the key first
then perform inserting a node at the end of linked
list
In searching, we find the key first then perform search in
a linked list and in deletion as we did in insertion
and searching first
We have to find the key
Then in that change in that linked list we have
to perform deletion and in printing we have to
traverse each list and print it.